Title: Write, follow, clap, comment, highlight, repeat | by John Pearce | Medium
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

author is  John Pearce

That seems to be the magic sauce in the Medium recipe, based on reading of lots of article on how to succeed.

Write

That’s what we’re here for, and unless you are a “lurker”, (like one of my brothers who has been on Facebook for five years without gaining a single friend, which is a bit sad but that is another tale). Regular posting of stories seems to stir the pot, and get us noticed. We all get stuck for ideas at times, and one suggestion is to use a random word/phrase generator, or if you come across a great new word, like jeremiad or bellwether, write an article on that. It is a fun challenge! It also seems to pay to tag lots of different topics with different articles, to pick up readers from across the spectrum of Medium, rather than just the needlecraft group of three. Mixing the ingredients makes for surprising results, which may be why I am only allowed to cook baked potatoes or pasta at home.

Follow

There seem to be mixed views on this. Some swear by “follow for follow” as a way to build numbers; at first I saw it as a bit like cheating, but came round to the view that it is reciprocal altruism in practice, and therefore a good thing, and great at building connections and a community among new members. Others regard “follow for follow” as a flawed strategy, as it may attract followers with little interest in your Morris Dancing niche, and instead prefer organic growth of genuine followers. It may be my writing, but I was only picking up a handful this way!

Clap

Just as “follow for follow” helps everyone climb the ladder, it is good to be nice, so if someone appreciates your writing, encourage them as well. To start with I didn’t realise you could clap up to 50 times, mistaking the clap symbol for being similar to the like feature in Facebook. Apologies for being a Grinch.

Comment

There seems wide agreement that engaging with other writers is good at building followers. It takes time, but it is beneficial for building the Medium community, so recommended.

Highlight

Not sure about this, as not everyone wants to see a particular phrase or paragraph of their work highlighted, but again it seems recommended, and shows appreciation of other writers’ work.

Repeat

Yes, back to writing. It is the purpose of Medium, and why most of us are here, except the lurkers!

So to succeed with your Medium masala, the magic sauce seems to be write, follow, clap, comment, highlight, repeat.
